Supplemental document:
# Exploration of geologically reasonable surface uplift and horizontal propagation rates
Kleber, et al.

## Overview

Reconstruction of displaced landforms with their ages provides the basic information to determine rates of faulting or fold growth. Gold and Cowgill (2011) and numerous others have explored this issue by considering the age-displacement data as part of a range of possible histories constrained by plausible samples through the age and position ranges. This approach has advantages over simple graphical fits through the data by including assessment of secular variations in rates, enabling exploration of the age and position constraints, and clarifying general nuance of the implications of the resulting history on the processes under investigation. 

In the case of Wheeler Ridge, the deformed surfaces provide information about surface uplift rates and horizontal propagation rates. We assume that the ages are normally distributed about a mean by a specified standard deviation (1 sigma). We truncate the age range at 2sigma We also assume that the surface uplift (SU) and horizontal position (propagation—displacement zone of the fold tip) are uniformly distributed between the specified ranges of preservation of the surfaces along the Wheeler Ridge axis. The age-SU and age-propagation pairs are selected from the specified ranges by random (“Monte Carlo”) sampling (n = 10^6 times). We use a positivity constraint, and include only those histories with positive rates of uplift or propagation. The resulting sequential histories from surface to surfaces are normalized and trimmed for significance as well as concatenated to develop a cumulative rate distribution. We explore significance levels and find that 0.6827 (equivalent to 1 on the output distributions) adequately trims the resulting pdf outliers. 
